---
layout: single
title: "EF Core - Creating queries with lists"
date: 2022-12-26 10:03
tags: ["EF Core"]
slug: "efcore-filter-list-query"
---

When writing queries towards the database at some point the need arises to filter out all items that are within a collection. For example let's say we have a list of Ids and want to get all the people associated with such an Id. How can we do this using [EF Core](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/ef/core/?WT.mc_id=AZ-MVP-5003494)? And what are the pitfalls that lead to the motivation of writing this blogpost? 🙈

<!-- more -->

If we had a list of attendee Ids with three Ids (123, 456, 789) and would want to find all the people having such an Id, the following SQL query (for an MS SQL DB) would yield the right result:

```sql
SELECT * FROM People WHERE AttendeeId IN (123, 456, 789)
```

Now don't hung up on the `SELECT *` in fact don't use it in production code. But the point of the SQL sample above is that with `IN` we can filter for a list of Arguments. If we want EF Core to generate this we have to write the following LINQ statement:

```c#
List<Person> attendees = await _context.People.Where(p => attendeeIds.Contains(p.AttendeeId)).ToListAsync();
```

If we inspect this query by using the `ToQueryString()` we see that this statement is converted into a SQL statement. 

```sql
SELECT [p].[PersonId], [p].[AttendeeId], [p].[Name]
FROM [People] AS [p]
WHERE [p].[AttendeeId] IN (1, 2, 3)
```

As the query above shows, using `attendeeIds.Contains(p => p.AttendeeId)` is correctly translated into an SQL query using an `IN` statement.

## Potential Pitfalls

**Client Evaluation**: There are other ways in LINQ how we could write this filter, and EF Core might even go ahead and execute it but it would most probably be executed by the application. In general executing queries in the application is not desired. SQL database engines are way more efficient in handling these queries. Be sure to consult the [MS Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/ef/core/querying/client-eval?WT.mc_id=AZ-MVP-5003494) on Client Evaluation to get a better understanding.

**Not using List**: I have a strong tendency to write functional inspired C#. So I very rarely pass a list into a function and prefer to pass in an `IReadOnlyCollection` .  For the above statement to be generated by EF Core you _must_ use a collection of type `List` or else you could end up with a runtime exception.



## Wrap up

Implementing a Filter using a list with EF Core is thanks to LINQ pretty straight forward. There are some pitfalls though which have to be kept in mind. Since EF Core has to generate an SQL Query from the LINQ statement there can be cases that the LINQ query will not be translated into a SQL. When this happens EF Core will fallback to Client Evaluation, which  Filtering Data in a SQL Table using EF Core takes some inside knowledge but is not complicated.

HTH



