---

layout: single
title: ".NET MAUI Device Runner Unit Tests"
date: 2023-03-28 00:03:00
tags: ["Automated Testing", "XUnit", "Device Runner", ".NET MAUI"]
slug: "maui-unit-testing"
---

Automated tests can be a great timesaver when developing any kind of application. Some pieces of code can be harder to test automatically since they require a dependency on an external ressource. When writing .NET MAUI apps this often means that a piece of code or library requires to run on a platform to perform it's function. This is the time when running your code on a device or emulator becomes mandatory. So let's see how this can be done.

<!-- expand -->

Before we start looking at how device running tests are implemented. Let's quickly discuss when these tests can be of great value. Generally speaking it is often a good idea to write your app in a way that your business logic does not have any dependency on any external parts. In C# this is usually done via Dependency Inversion and Dependency Injection LLLLINK. But if you are writing the code that interacts with a platform, the very reason of existence for that code is to be dependent on a given platform SDK. In those cases using device running unit tests will be a great time saver.



The sample we will be using does not require any platform specifics, but it will highlight how we have to architect our app and how to setup the test project. As a test project we will use the Hello World .NET MAUI project and add a ViewModel which takes over the code that is implemented in the code behind. The ViewModel will be placed in a class library and the .NET MAUI app will reference said library. The test project will then reference said library. Giving us the following projects:

IIIIMAGE

With the projects and code to test in place, lets move along and implement the test project. We start out by creating a new .NET MAUI application and deleting the following files `App.xaml`, `App.xaml.cs`, `AppShell.xaml`, `AppShell.xaml.cs`, `MainPage.xaml`, `MainPage.xaml.cs` . Next we will install the [Shiny.Xunit.Runners.Maui](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Shiny.Xunit.Runners.Maui) NuGet package, created by [Allan Ritchie](https://github.com/aritchie). And in the XXX

Test project

Setup instructions: https://github.com/shinyorg/xunit-maui

Conclusion

Should you run all your tests from now on using device runners?

You can find the complete sample on [GitHub](https://github.com/mallibone/MauiTesting101).

HTH